Commercial agreements
AI is an emerging market. As well as rapidly evolving technology, there are ongoing changes
in the supply base and the products and services it offers. DPSs offer flexibility for new
suppliers to join, which often complement these dynamics well for buyers.
Any public sector buyers interested in shaping CCS’s longer term commercial agreement
portfolio should express their interest via info@crowncommercial.gov.uk
Regulation and policy
Regulation and policy will also evolve to keep pace. However, there are already a number of
legal and regulatory provisions which are relevant to the use of AI technologies.
• UK data protection law: regulation around automated decision making, processing
personal data, processing for the purpose of developing and training AI technologies. In
November 2022, a new Procurement Policy Note was published to provide an update to
this: PPN 03/22 Updated guidance on data protection legislation.
• Online Safety Act: provisions concerning design and use of algorithms are to be
included in a new set of laws to protect children and adults online. It will make social
media companies more responsible for their users’ safety on their platforms.
• A pro-innovation approach to AI regulation: this white paper published in March 2023,
sets out early steps towards establishing a regulatory regime for AI. The white paper
outlines a proportionate pro-innovation framework, including five principles to guide
responsible AI innovation in all sectors.
• Centre for Data Ethics and Innovation (CDEI) AI assurance techniques: the portfolio
of AI assurance techniques has been developed by the CDEI, initially in collaboration with
techUK. The portfolio is useful for anybody involved in designing, developing, deploying
or procuring AI-enabled systems. It shows examples of AI assurance techniques being
used in the real-world to support the development of trustworthy AI.
Further guidance is also available from the Information Commissioner’s Office, Equality
and Human Rights Commission, Medicines and Healthcare products Regulation
Authority and the Health and Safety Executive.
