There are four different abilities that players will encounter on the Locations in
the game:
FIELDS
These cards don’t have any keywords, only icons shown in the middle of the ability
description box representing the Goods that may be Harvested from this Location.
Fields give the player the depicted Goods immediately when the Field is built, and
each time a Harvest action is declared on that Field.
IMPORTANT: Some Field Locations work only as upgrades. These Fields have
the Resources on the right side of the ability description box. Once built these
Locations have to be attached to an existing Field in your Empire of the same
Goods type. The card is slid underneath the existing Field with just the additional
Good icons on the right visible. When the Field upgrade is built, the player
gains ONLY the Goods provided by that upgrade card, not the entire Field it is
upgrading. When the player Harvests a Field with one or more upgrades, then
they gain Goods from this Field and all of its upgrades. Upgrade cards give 1
at the end of the game just like any other Location
FEATURE
These cards can have various special abilities described on the cards. These card
abilities may be triggered during any player’s turn, and in certain cases they can
grant the player Goods after taking specific actions.
INSTANT
These cards’ ability is resolved immediately when they are played, and the card is
discarded afterward.
ACTION
To use the Location’s ability a player has to exhaust the card by rotating it 90
degrees to the right. They then must pay any cost described in the ability text.
Once the card is exhausted, its ability is no longer available.
IMPORTANT: Only Action Location cards are exhausted after use. Both Feature
and Field location cards are not exhausted, even if a player gained something
from them multiple times, unless stated otherwise.
OTE 1: Several Locations can also
have a Building Bonus which is an
additional one-time ability that
activates when such Location is
placed in a player’s Empire.
NOTE 2: Some abilities in the
game have a ‘/’ divider between
presented choices. This should be
treated as an ‘or.’ A player must
choose one option when using that
ability, for instance ‘Gain 1 / .’
means that a player chooses either
to gain 1 or 1
NOTE 3: Some abilities allow players to Pillage
or Conquer right away, before the Expedition
phase, in such cases a Ship is still required to be
on the Expedition board to use it, along with any
appropriate Goods assigned to it. This ability allows
the Ship to resolve the Pillage or Conquest outside
of the Expedition phase and to gain the card/Goods
in the current Action phase. The Ship is returned to
the player’s supply, and any Raze token and/or Fish
assigned to it is discarded as usual, even if it wasn’t
used. A Ship that was returned in this manner may be
used again during this round to Sail (described later
in this section).
